[Music]
good morning and welcome to breakfast
with roger johnson and sally nugent
hello good morning our headlines today a
billion pound boost for pubs shops and
restaurants in england which have been
worst hit by the pandemic
families of school-aged children in
england will be offered two
rapid covered tests each week
the moment an unexploded bomb from the
second world war was detonated
in exeter good morning the grand slam
is still on for wales they beat england
to take the triple crown and remain
unbeaten in this year's six nations
good morning the weather's looking
mostly dry for the last day of february
and
into the start of march but it won't
always be sunny
there'll be some mist and fog to contend
with too all the details
on the way
[Music]
morning it's sunday the 28th of february
our top story on the programme this
morning pubs
shops and other businesses in england
will be boosted by a 5
billion pound government grant to help
them reopen safely
as lockdown restrictions are eased
companies will be able to apply for a
one-off payment which will replace
the current monthly grant system the
measure will be outlined by the
chancellor in his budget
on wednesday our business correspondent
katie prescott reports
the first signs of spring and with them
hope of new beginnings for businesses
as lockdown eases but it's not been an
easy ride
despite government support salons like
this one
still have rents and overheads we can't
do takeaway haircuts
and we can't go into people's homes
there's there's no way that a hair salon
or beauty salon can pivot
or you know help you know make any
income
during these lockdowns so when we're
shut we're
uh you know there's that we're losing
money every day
to help reopen their doors the
government is offering new one-off
grants to businesses
that have been forced to close by covid
replacing
the current monthly grant scheme
non-essential retailers will receive up
to six thousand pounds for each shop
they own
hospitality gyms and beauty businesses
will get up to eighteen thousand pounds
per premises
as they're due to open with more
restrictions or later in the year
and overall seven hundred thousand
businesses will be eligible for the
funds
which will be distributed by local
authorities in england from april
some businesses say though it's not
enough although the eighteen
thousand pounds is fantastic you know
it's it's
certainly something and it's gonna help
a lot of people
it's not going to help me very much and
and the larger salons is
many of us are losing over a thousand
pounds a day
so you know you know what if we're for
that's not going to
cover over half of a month that we're
closing down these little crumbs
of of acknowledgements and these little
grants that come out
uh really probably less than cover the
cost of showing for one month and that
might
that might be some help some small
businesses get them reopening
but the truth is the damage that's been
done to balance sheets
is very very severe and will need a much
more substantial package than this
[Music]
in that package businesses are hoping
for an extension to the business rates
holiday
the furlough scheme and the lower rate
of vat
but the chancellor's treading a
difficult path
between spending to support companies
like these
and what borrowing to pay for it means
for the future of the country's finances
katie prescott bbc news
whole families and households with
primary secondary school and college-age
children will be able to test themselves
for coronavirus at home
twice a week as part of plans for
schools to reopen to all pupils in
england
the quick turnaround tests will be
offered regardless of whether anyone has
any symptoms as our health correspondent
naomi grimley reports
if you live with a school-aged child in
england
get ready to start using these the
30-minute tests also called lateral flow
tests
are already used in universities and by
key workers
and secondary schools will be supplied
with them as they open their doors again
but this latest announcement means all
children and
anyone who lives with them as well as
people like school bus drivers and
carers
will be offered two tests per person
each week
health officials hope it will uncover
hidden cases of the virus
and break chains of transmission testing
has expanded
greatly over the last few months and
it's one important
component of our battle against
coronavirus
if anyone tests positive they will still
need a laboratory assessed test to
double check the result
nemi grimly bbc news well regulators in
the united states have approved a third
covert vaccine for use the single dose
injection from johnson and johnson the
jab which can be stored in a fridge
instead of a freezer
is expected to be a cost-effective
alternative to the
pfizer and moderna vaccines in the us
the duke and duchess of cambridge have
been making a series of video calls to
members of the public
urging them to put aside their concerns
about the covid vaccine
more than 19.6 million people have now
had their first
dose of the vaccine prince william and
catherine were speaking online to
families who have been shielding
and who were about to receive their jabs
did you reach out to your gp i did yeah
i mean i think my gp hates me now
so much um i think one of the main
things i was worried about was
things like simple things like getting
your prescription you know because there
was all those kind of worries about
literally leaving the house um so you
know i spoke to her about that
i spoke to her about shielding i spoke
to her about you know hopefully getting
on some kind of priority list
so yeah we've been in touch a lot
[Music]
now there have been further clashes in
myanmar where at least two people
protesting against this month's military
coup
are reported to have been shot dead by
security forces
over 400 people were arrested in the
city of yangon police have moved swiftly
to suppress
new protests on city streets firing live
rounds and rubber bullets at the
demonstrators let's go live to singapore
our reporter nick marsh is monitoring
developments just bring us up to date
with the latest nick please
yeah well the demonstrators have wasted
no time today in myanmar some people out
on the streets
as early as six or seven in the morning
local time they're continuing to oppose
this military coup
which took place almost four weeks ago
now and the authorities
have been responding with force we're
hearing reports of
around five people having been shot with
live ammunition
in central yangon we saw some quite
graphic images on social media
of a man being shot at point blank range
in the chest
local media myanmar is saying that that
man has now died in hospital we can't
confirm that right now we also heard
reports of another protester having been
shot and killed in the city of darwin
now this is all on top of the now usual
rubber bullets tear gas stun grenades
but in spite of these considerable risks
for the protesters
people are still turning out in their
droves in their thousands
hundreds of thousands we saw yesterday
and we're expecting
more of the same today their message is
quite clear they want to see this coup
ended they want a return to democracy
and they want to see the release
of ansan tsuji the elected leader of
myanmar
having said all that the military still
really is
quite firmly in control right now ang
sang tsuchi and her key allies in the
national league for democracy party
are still all in detention and the
results of this november election in
which and sang tsuchi and her party did
so well
well now they've been officially
annulled so in spite of everything we're
seeing
it seemed like the military command is
really still in no mood to listen to
many of its people
okay nick thank you very much indeed
nick marsh reporting from singapore
now the leaders of 60 black majority
churches are joining forces today to
show support for the uk's coronavirus
vaccination program
the aim of the project is to address and
dispel concerns in black asian
and minority ethnic communities here's
our religion reporter harry farley
in east london one of the first pop-up
vaccination centers
in a black majority church so we've got
about 145 people
coming in the next two hours scientists
health leaders and government ministers
have all raised concerns that those from
ethnic minority communities
are significantly less likely to get the
coronavirus vaccine
than white people but black people are
up to four times more likely to die with
19 than white people if we look at our
white population in general
the overall uptake is about 70 percent
we have a big ethnic minority population
over here
so in our pakistani community it's
between 45 and 50
but when we look at the black african
community it's closer to 36 to 38
so the uptake's been really low places
of worship around the country
have been turned into vaccine centers in
an effort to counter hesitancy
now 60 influential black church leaders
are telling their congregations
that if they want to love their
neighbour they should get the jab
this is the best and fastest route
out of this terrible pandemic i'm going
to take the vaccine myself so it's my
wife so my children
and because it's not just about
you it's about protecting others i
believe
also that it's part of the answer to our
prayers i said to my
congregation we've been praying for god
to give the scientific community
wisdom um for them to get a vaccine
there's the vaccine now so
prayers have been answered why don't you
go ahead and take the vaccine
he says churches can play a key role in
driving uptake
it's already made a difference right i
can tell you that um there are
quite a number of people who were not
going to take the vaccine who are now
going to take it and quite a number who
are sitting on the fence
who have been assured by this campaign
harry farley bbc news
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news